---
layout: post
title: Writing
---
Chronic pain is an incredibly complex condition, and when you are trying to work out how to deal with it there are a lot of difficult, counter-intuitive and unpleasant things you need to get your head around. If you have someone you can and want to do this with then that's fantastic. Personally, up until now I have generally preferred to do it on my own, using pen and paper or a digital equivalent. Whatever your preference, writing down what you are thinking and feeling about your pain gives you the opportunity to methodically talk things through with yourself. This is a fantastic thing to be able to do.

You inevitably spend a lot of your time thinking about pain in some form, but this is mostly an unconstructive haze of frustration and stress. Writing makes you to slow down and focus. It forces you to give your thoughts structure, which often means you come up with new ways of looking at things. You can't hold the entirety of a complex train of thought in your head, and writing it down means you don't have to. It is not a static process and will necessarily change and add depth to your beliefs. What's more, you get something to look back on in the future; something that shows you what you've learned, how far you've come and whether you've forgotten anything that was once important to you.

You don't need to write a structured diary. I just write stuff down as and when I feel like it. Sometimes this is multiple times a day, sometimes as little as once a fortnight. I've noticed that my entries often end up as conversations with myself, and that I often end up questioning a lot of things I don't think I would have got round to questioning otherwise. Sentences like "Maybe I'm over-thinking this?" crop up a lot, and even the most despairing entries rarely end without some solace. There are of course an enormous number of different tools you can use. I use Evernote and occasionally a notebook; Evernote because everything is automatically backed up in the cloud, and a notebook when I simply don't want to have to look at a screen.

Writing your thoughts down is therapeutic. It helps expand, question and solidify your beliefs. It acts as documentation of how you approach chronic pain, and everything you write is a record of how you manage to live a full life despite the crap you are dealing with.

I can't imagine anything more valuable.

--------

Do you write much? Are you planning on starting? Let me know in the comments.