---
layout: post
title: Safety
---
When you experience pain, your brain immediately assumes there must be danger. So if you aren't careful, chronic pain can leave you with the constant feeling that there's an angry gorilla hiding in your cupboard.

I have two bubbles of safety that melt these feelings away - reading books in the bath and lying in bed watching 20 minute US sitcoms with characters I know and love. On the other hand, some situations make me feel particularly nervous and on edge, like house parties, loud bars and poker games with not much money at stake. I used to think that this was simply because I found these things boring. But filling in forms is boring, buying food is boring, awkward networking events are boring, and none of them make me feel on edge in the same way.

I realised that the amount I felt threatened by a situation was directly related to how free I was to go home and get into bed or the bath if I wanted, and how long it would theoretically take to do so. I know that if I am socially or physically trapped in a situation then any pain flare-up will result in a long and unpleasant experience. So whilst I almost never do, the freedom to decide "screw this" and go home limits the amount of danger I can feel, and is therefore paradoxically significantly important to my enjoyment of anything.

I noticed that I actually prefer going to parties on my own and where I don't know many people, because then I can just pack up and leave whenever I want. I prefer going places where I can walk, cycle or skate home, as these are fixed length journeys that I control with little chance of delay. Trains and buses are unreliable at best, and cars tie you down to whoever else is sharing your ride. It also seems that having too many busy evenings in a row can make me very agitated, as this can put me days away from a safe opportunity to pause and recuperate.

This simple framework of safety and danger started making it much easier for me to decide what to do and what not to do. It helped explain why I liked doing some things but tended to avoided others. It became easier to instinctively turn down invitations on relatively vague grounds without worrying about being an anti-social recluse, as there would be plenty of other opportunities that would feel right and I knew what they looked like.

It feels important not to cling too hard to safety and not to shy away from everything that feels slightly unpleasant. This will leave you with a very low tolerance to stress, and there's only so much of your life you can spend watching Arrested Development. But just knowing that those safe situations are there if you need them can make it much easier to gradually expand your comfort zone and get through some tough spots. I now know when to run away from angry gorillas and when to punch them in the mouth.

I'd love to hear if you've found anything similar or indeed completely differently in the comments.